<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book 8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="book-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
			<section id="part-8-1">
				<h3>Life of Pythagoras</h3>
				<p>Since we have now gone through the Ionian philosophy, which was derived from Thales, and the lives of the several illustrious men who were the chief ornaments of that school; we will now proceed to treat of the Italian School, which was founded by Pythagoras, the son of Mnesarchus, a seal engraver, as he is recorded to have been by Hermippus; a native of Samos, or as Aristoxenus asserts, a Tyrrhenian, and a native of one of the islands which the Athenians occupied after they had driven out the Tyrrhenians. But some authors say that he was the son of Marmacus, the son of Hippasus, the son of Euthyphron, the son of Cleonymus, who was an exile from Phlias; and that Marmacus settled in Samos, and that from this circumstance Pythagoras was called a Samian. After that he migrated to Lesbos, having come to Pherecydes with letters of recommendation from Zoilus, his uncle. And having made three silver goblets, he carried them to Egypt as a present for each of the three priests. He had brothers, the eldest of whom was named Eunomus, the middle one Tyrrhenus, and a slave named Zamolxis, to whom the Getae sacrifice, believing him to be the same as Saturn, according to the account of Herodotus.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-107" id="noteref-107" epub:type="noteref">107</a></p>
				<p>He was a pupil, as I have already mentioned, of Pherecydes, the Syrian; and after his death he came to Samos, and became a pupil of Hermodamas, the descendant of Creophylus, who was by this time an old man.</p>
				<p>And as he was a young man, and devoted to learning, he quitted his country, and got initiated into all the Grecian and barbarian sacred mysteries. Accordingly, he went to Egypt, on which occasion Polycrates gave him a letter of introduction to Amasis; and he learnt the Egyptian language, as Antipho tells us, in his treatise on those men who have been conspicuous for virtue, and he associated with the Chaldaeans and with the Magi.</p>
				<p>Afterwards he went to Crete, and in company with Epimenides, he descended into the Idaean cave, (and in Egypt too, he entered into the holiest parts of their temples,) and learned all the most secret mysteries that relate to their Gods. Then he returned back again to Samos, and finding his country reduced under the absolute dominion of Polycrates, he set sail, and fled to Crotona in Italy. And there, having given laws to the Italians, he gained a very high reputation, together with his scholars, who were about three hundred in number, and governed the republic in a most excellent manner; so that the constitution was very nearly an aristocracy.</p>
				<p>Heraclides Ponticus says that he was accustomed to speak of himself in this manner; that he had formerly been Aethalides, and had been accounted the son of Mercury; and that Mercury had desired him to select any gift he pleased except immortality. And that he accordingly had requested that, whether living or dead, he might preserve the memory of what had happened to him. While, therefore, he was alive, he recollected everything; and when he was dead, he retained the same memory. And at a subsequent period he passed into Euphorbus, and was wounded by Menelaus. And while he was Euphorbus, he used to say that he had formerly been Aethalides; and that he had received as a gift from Mercury the perpetual transmigration of his soul, so that it was constantly transmigrating and passing into whatever plants or animals it pleased; and he had also received the gift of knowing and recollecting all that his soul had suffered in hell, and what sufferings too are endured by the rest of the souls.</p>
				<p>But after Euphorbus died, he said that his soul had passed into Hermotimus; and when he wished to convince people of this, he went into the territory of the Branchidae, and going into the temple of Apollo, he showed his shield which Menelaus had dedicated there as an offering. For he said that he, when he sailed from Troy, had offered up his shield<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-108" id="noteref-108" epub:type="noteref">108</a> which was already getting worn out, to Apollo, and that nothing remained but the ivory face which was on it. And when Hermotimus died, then he said that he had become Pyrrhus, a fisherman of Delos; and that he still recollected everything, how he had been formerly Aethalides, then Euphorbus, then Hermotimus, and then Pyrrhus. And when Pyrrhus died, he became Pythagoras, and still recollected all the circumstances that I have been mentioning.</p>
				<p>Now, some people say that Pythagoras did not leave behind him a single book; but they talk foolishly; for Heraclitus, the natural philosopher, speaks plainly enough of him, saying, “Pythagoras, the son of Mnesarchus, was the most learned of all men in history; and having selected from these writings, he thus formed his own wisdom and extensive learning, and mischievous art.” And he speaks thus, because Pythagoras, in the beginning of his treatise on Natural Philosophy, writes in the following manner: “By the air which I breathe, and by the water which I drink, I will not endure to be blamed on account of this discourse.”</p>
				<p>And there are three volumes extant written by Pythagoras. One on Education; one on Politics; and one on Natural Philosophy. But the treatise which is now extant under the name of Pythagoras is the work of Lysis, of Tarentum, a philosopher of the Pythagorean School, who fled to Thebes, and became the master of Epaminondas. And Heraclides, the son of Sarapion, in his Abridgment of Sotion, says that he wrote a poem in epic verse on the Universe; and besides that a sacred poem, which begins thus;⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Dear youths, I warn you cherish peace divine,</span>
						<span>And in your hearts lay deep these words of mine.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>A third about the Soul; a fourth on Piety; a fifth entitled Helothales, which was the name of the father of Epicharmus, of Cos; a sixth called Crotona, and other poems too. But the mystic discourse which is extant under his name, they say is really the work of Hippasus, having been composed with a view to bring Pythagoras into disrepute. There were also many other books composed by Aston, of Crotona, and attributed to Pythagoras.</p>
				<p>Aristoxenus asserts that Pythagoras derived the greater part of his ethical doctrines from Themistoclea, the priestess at Delphi. And Ion, of Chios, in his Victories, says that he wrote some poems and attributed them to Orpheus. They also say that the poem called the Scopiadae is by him, which begins thus:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Behave not shamelessly to anyone.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And Sosicrates, in his Successions, relates that he, having being asked by Leon, the tyrant of the Phliasians, who he was, replied, “A philosopher.” And adds, that he used to compare life to a festival. “And as some people came to a festival to contend for the prizes, and others for the purposes of traffic, and the best as spectators; so also in life, the men of slavish dispositions,” said he, “are born hunters after glory and covetousness, but philosophers are seekers after truth.” And thus he spoke on this subject. But in the three treatises above mentioned, the following principles are laid down by Pythagoras generally.</p>
				<p>He forbids men to pray for anything in particular for themselves, because they do not know what is good for them. He calls drunkenness an expression identical with ruin, and rejects all superfluity, saying, “That no one ought to exceed the proper quantity of meat and drink.” And on the subject of venereal pleasures, he speaks thus:⁠—“One ought to sacrifice to Venus in the winter, not in the summer; and in autumn and spring in a lesser degree. But the practice is pernicious at every season, and is never good for the health.” And once, when he was asked when a man might indulge in the pleasures of love, he replied, “Whenever you wish to be weaker than yourself.”</p>
				<p>And he divides the life of man thus. A boy for twenty years; a young man (νεάνισκος) for twenty years; a middle-aged man (νεανίας) for twenty years; an old man for twenty years. And these different ages correspond proportionably to the seasons: boyhood answers to spring; youth to summer; middle age to autumn; and old age to winter. And he uses νεάνισκος here as equivalent to μειράκιον, and νεανίας as equivalent to ἀνὴρ.</p>
				<p>He was the first person, as Timaeus says, who asserted that the property of friends is common, and that friendship is equality. And his disciples used to put all their possessions together into one store, and use them in common; and for five years they kept silence, doing nothing but listen to discourses, and never once seeing Pythagoras, until they were approved; after that time they were admitted into his house, and allowed to see him. They also abstained from the use of cypress coffins, because the sceptre of Jupiter was made of that wood, as Hermippus tells us in the second book of his account of Pythagoras.</p>
				<p>He is said to have been a man of the most dignified appearance, and his disciples adopted an opinion respecting him, that he was Apollo who had come from the Hyperboreans; and it is said, that once when he was stripped naked, he was seen to have a golden thigh. And there were many people who affirmed, that when he was crossing the river Nessus it addressed him by his name.</p>
				<p>Timaeus, in the tenth book of his Histories, tells us, that he used to say that women who were married to men had the names of the Gods, being successively called virgins, then nymphs, and subsequently mothers.</p>
				<p>It was Pythagoras also who carried geometry to perfection, after Moeris had first found out the principles of the elements of that science, as Aristiclides tells us in the second book of his History of Alexander; and the part of the science to which Pythagoras applied himself above all others was arithmetic. He also discovered the numerical relation of sounds on a single string: he also studied medicine. And Apollodorus, the logician, records of him, that he sacrificed a hecatomb, when he had discovered that the square of the hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle is equal to the squares of the sides containing the right angle. And there is an epigram which is couched in the following terms:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>When the great Samian sage his noble problem found,</span>
						<span>A hundred oxen dyed with their lifeblood the ground.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>He is also said to have been the first man who trained athletes on meat; and Eurymenes was the first man, according to the statement of Phavorinus, in the third book of his Commentaries, who ever did submit to this diet, as before that time men used to train themselves on dry figs and moist cheese, and wheaten bread; as the same Phavorinus informs us in the eighth book of his Universal History. But some authors state, that a trainer of the name of Pythagoras certainly did train his athletes on this system, but that it was not our philosopher; for that he even forbade men to kill animals at all, much less would have allowed his disciples to eat them, as having a right to live in common with mankind. And this was his pretext; but in reality he prohibited the eating of animals, because he wished to train and accustom men to simplicity of life, so that all their food should be easily procurable, as it would be, if they ate only such things as required no fire to dress them, and if they drank plain water; for from this diet they would derive health of body and acuteness of intellect.</p>
				<p>The only altar at which he worshipped was that of Apollo the Father, at Delos, which is at the back of the altar of Ceratinus, because wheat, and barley, and cheesecakes are the only offerings laid upon it, being not dressed by fire; and no victim is ever slain there, as Aristotle tells us in his Constitution of the Delians. They say, too, that he was the first person who asserted that the soul went a necessary circle being changed about and confined at different times in different bodies.</p>
				<p>He was also the first person who introduced measures and weights among the Greeks; as Aristoxenus the musician informs us.</p>
				<p>Parmenides, too, assures us, that he was the first person who asserted the identity of Hesperus and Lucifer.</p>
				<p>And he was so greatly admired, that they used to say that his friends looked on all his sayings as the oracles of God.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-109" id="noteref-109" epub:type="noteref">109</a> And he himself says in his writings, that he had come among men after having spent two hundred and seven years in the shades below. Therefore the Lucanians and the Peucetians, and the Messapians, and the Romans, flocked around him, coming with eagerness to hear his discourses; but until the time of Philolaus there were no doctrines of Pythagoras ever divulged; and he was the first person who published the three celebrated books which Plato wrote to have purchased for him for a hundred minae. Nor were the number of his scholars who used to come to him by night fewer than six hundred. And if any of them had ever been permitted to see him, they wrote of it to their friends, as if they had gained some great advantage.</p>
				<p>The people of Metapontum used to call his house the temple of Ceres; and the street leading to it they called the street of the Muses, as we are told by Phavorinus in his Universal History.</p>
				<p>And the rest of the Pythagoreans used to say, according to the account given by Aristoxenus, in the tenth book of his Laws on Education, that his precepts ought not to be divulged to all the world; and Xenophilus, the Pythagorean, when he was asked what was the best way for a man to educate his son, said, “That he must first of all take care that he was born in a city which enjoyed good laws.”</p>
				<p>Pythagoras, too, formed many excellent men in Italy, by his precepts, and among them Zaleucus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-110" id="noteref-110" epub:type="noteref">110</a> and Charondas,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-111" id="noteref-111" epub:type="noteref">111</a> the lawgivers.</p>
				<p>For he was very eminent for his power of attracting friendships; and among other things, if ever he heard that anyone had any community of symbols with him, he at once made him a companion and a friend.</p>
				<p>Now, what he called his symbols were such as these. “Do not stir the fire with a sword.” “Do not sit down on a bushel.” “Do not devour your heart.” “Do not aid men in discarding a burden, but in increasing one.” “Always have your bed packed up.” “Do not bear the image of a God on a ring.” “Efface the traces of a pot in the ashes.” “Do not wipe a seat with a lamp.” “Do not make water in the sunshine.” “Do not walk in the main street.” “Do not offer your right hand lightly.” “Do not cherish swallows under your roof.” “Do not cherish birds with crooked talons.” “Do not defile; and do not stand upon the parings of your nails, or the cuttings of your hair.” “Avoid a sharp sword.” “When you are travelling abroad, look not back at your own borders.” Now the precept not to stir fire with a sword meant, not to provoke the anger or swelling pride of powerful men; not to violate the beam of the balance meant, not to transgress fairness and justice; not to sit on a bushel is to have an equal care for the present and for the future, for by the bushel is meant one’s daily food. By not devouring one’s heart, he intended to show that we ought not to waste away our souls with grief and sorrow. In the precept that a man when travelling abroad should not turn his eyes back, he recommended those who were departing from life not to be desirous to live, and not to be too much attracted by the pleasures here on earth. And the other symbols may be explained in a similar manner, that we may not be too prolix here.</p>
				<p>And above all things, he used to prohibit the eating of the erythinus, and the melanurus; and also, he enjoined his disciples to abstain from the hearts of animals, and from beans. And Aristotle informs us, that he sometimes used also to add to these prohibitions paunches and mullet. And some authors assert that he himself used to be contented with honey and honeycomb, and bread, and that he never drank wine in the day time. And his desert was usually vegetables, either boiled or raw; and he very rarely ate fish. His dress was white, very clean, and his bedclothes were also white, and woollen, for linen had not yet been introduced into that country. He was never known to have eaten too much, or to have drunk too much, or to indulge in the pleasures of love. He abstained wholly from laughter, and from all such indulgences as jests and idle stories. And when he was angry, he never chastised anyone, whether slave or freeman. He used to call admonishing, feeding storks.</p>
				<p>He used to practise divination, as far as auguries and auspices go, but not by means of burnt offerings, except only the burning of frankincense. And all the sacrifices which he offered consisted of inanimate things. But some, however, assert that he did sacrifice animals, limiting himself to cocks, and sucking kids, which are called ἁπάλιοι, but that he very rarely offered lambs. Aristoxenus, however, affirms that he permitted the eating of all other animals, and only abstained from oxen used in agriculture, and from rams.</p>
				<p>The same author tells us, as I have already mentioned, that he received his doctrines from Themistoclea, at Delphi. And Hieronymus says that when he descended to the shades below, he saw the soul of Hesiod bound to a brazen pillar, and gnashing its teeth; and that of Homer suspended from a tree, and snakes around it, as a punishment for the things that they had said of the Gods. And that those people also were punished who refrained from commerce with their wives; and that on account of this he was greatly honored by the people of Crotona.</p>
				<p>But Aristippus, of Cyrene, in his Account of Natural Philosophers, says that Pythagoras derived his name from the fact of his speaking (ἀγορεύειν) truth no less than the God at Delphi (τοῦ πυθίου).</p>
				<p>It is said that he used to admonish his disciples to repeat these lines to themselves whenever they returned home to their houses:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>In what have I transgress’d? What have I done?</span>
						<span>What that I should have done have I omitted?</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And that he used to forbid them to offer victims to the Gods, ordering them to worship only at those altars which were unstained with blood. He forbade them also to swear by the Gods; saying, “That every man ought so to exercise himself, as to be worthy of belief without an oath.” He also taught men that it behoved them to honor their elders, thinking that which was precedent in point of time more honorable; just as in the world, the rising of the sun was more so than the setting; in life, the beginning more so than the end; and in animals, production more so than destruction.</p>
				<p>Another of his rules was that men should honor the Gods above the daemones, heroes above men; and of all men parents were entitled to the highest degree of reverence. Another, that people should associate with one another in such a way as not to make their friends enemies, but to render their enemies friends. Another was that they should think nothing exclusively their own. Another was to assist the law, and to make war upon lawlessness. Not to destroy or injure a cultivated tree, nor any animal either which does not injure men. That modesty and decorum consisted in never yielding to laughter, and yet not looking stern. He taught that men should avoid too much flesh, that they should in travelling let rest and exertion alternate; that they should exercise memory; that they should never say or do anything in anger; that they should not pay respect to every kind of divination; that they should use songs set to the lyre; and by hymns to the Gods and to eminent men, display a reasonable gratitude to them.</p>
				<p>He also forbade his disciples to eat beans, because, as they were flatulent, they greatly partook of animal properties [he also said that men kept their stomachs in better order by avoiding them]; and that such abstinence made the visions which appear in one’s sleep gentle and free from agitation. Alexander also says, in his Successions of Philosophers, that he found the following dogmas also set down in the Commentaries of Pythagoras:⁠—</p>
				<p>That the monad was the beginning of everything. From the monad proceeds an indefinite duad, which is subordinate to the monad as to its cause. That from the monad and the indefinite duad proceed numbers. And from numbers signs. And from these last, lines of which plane figures consist. And from plane figures are derived solid bodies. And from solid bodies sensible bodies, of which last there are four elements; fire, water, earth, and air. And that the world, which is endued with life, and intellect, and which is of a spherical figure, having the earth, which is also spherical, and inhabited all over in its center, results from a combination of these elements, and derives its motion from them; and also that there are antipodes,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-112" id="noteref-112" epub:type="noteref">112</a> and that what is below, as respects us, is above in respect of them.</p>
				<p>He also taught that light and darkness and cold and heat, and dryness and moisture, were equally divided in the world; and that, while heat was predominant it was summer; while cold had the mastery it was winter; when dryness prevailed it was spring; and when moisture preponderated, winter. And while all these qualities were on a level, then was the loveliest season of the year; of which the flourishing spring was the wholesome period, and the season of autumn the most pernicious one. Of the day, he said that the flourishing period was the morning, and the fading one the evening; on which account that also was the least healthy time.</p>
				<p>Another of his theories was, that the air around the earth was immoveable, and pregnant with disease, and that everything in it was mortal; but that the upper air was in perpetual motion, and pure and salubrious; and that everything in that was immortal, and on that account divine. And that the sun, and the moon, and the stars, were all Gods; for in them the warm principle predominates which is the cause of life. And that the moon derives its light from the sun. And that there is a relationship between men and the Gods, because men partake of the divine principle; on which account also, God exercises his providence for our advantage. Also, that fate is the cause of the arrangement of the world both generally and particularly. Moreover, that a ray from the sun penetrated both the cold aether and the dense aether; and they call the air (ἀὴρ), the cold aether (ψυχρὸν αἰθέρα), and the sea and moisture they call the dense aether (παχὺν αἰθέρα). And this ray descends into the depths, and in this way vivifies everything. And everything which partakes of the principle of heat lives, on which account also plants are animated beings; but that all living things have not necessarily souls. And that the soul is a something torn off from the aether, both warm and cold, from its partaking of the cold aether. And that the soul is something different from life. Also, that it is immortal, because that from which it has been detached is immortal.</p>
				<p>Also, that animals are born from one another by seeds, and that it is impossible for there to be any spontaneous production by the earth. And that seed is a drop from the brain which contains in itself a warm vapour; and that when this is applied to the womb, it transmits virtue, and moisture, and blood from the brain, from which flesh, and sinews, and bones, and hair, and the whole body are produced. And from the vapour is produced the soul, and also sensation. And that the infant first becomes a solid body at the end of forty days; but, according to the principles of harmony, it is not perfect till seven, or perhaps nine, or at most ten months, and then it is brought forth. And that it contains in itself all the principles of life, which are all connected together, and by their union and combination form a harmonious whole, each of them developing itself at the appointed time.</p>
				<p>The senses in general, and especially the sight, are a vapour of excessive warmth, and on this account a man is said to see through air, and through water. For the hot principle is opposed by the cold one; since, if the vapour in the eyes were cold, it would have the same temperature as the air, and so would be dissipated. As it is, in some passages he calls the eyes the gates of the sun. And he speaks in a similar manner of hearing, and of the other senses.</p>
				<p>He also says that the soul of man is divided into three parts; into intuition (νοῦς), and reason (φρὴν), and mind (θυμὸς), and that the first and last divisions are found also in other animals, but that the middle one, reason, is only found in man. And that the chief abode of the soul is in those parts of the body which are between the heart and the brain. And that that portion of it which is in the heart is the mind (θυμὸς); but that deliberation (νοὺς), and reason (φρὴν), reside in the brain.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-113" id="noteref-113" epub:type="noteref">113</a></p>
				<p>Moreover, that the senses are drops from them; and that the reasoning sense is immortal, but the others are mortal. And that the soul is nourished by the blood; and that reasons are the winds of the soul. That it is invisible, and so are its reasons, since the aether itself is invisible. That the links of the soul are the veins, and the arteries, and the nerves. But that when it is vigorous, and is by itself in a quiescent state, then its links are words and actions. That when it is cast forth upon the earth it wanders about, resembling the body. Moreover, that Mercury is the steward of the souls, and that on this account he has the name of Conductor, and Commercial, and Infernal, since it is he who conducts the souls from their bodies, and from earth, and sea; and that he conducts the pure souls to the highest region, and that he does not allow the impure ones to approach them, nor to come near one another; but commits them to be bound in indissoluble fetters by the Furies. The Pythagoreans also assert, that the whole air is full of souls, and that these are those which are accounted daemones, and heroes. Also, that it is by them that dreams are sent among men, and also the tokens of disease and health; these last too, being sent not only to men, but to sheep also, and other cattle. Also, that it is they who are concerned with purifications, and expiations, and all kinds of divination, and oracular predictions, and things of that kind.</p>
				<p>They also say that the most important privilege in man is, the being able to persuade his soul to either good or bad. And that men are happy when they have a good soul; yet, that they are never quiet, and that they never retain the same mind long. Also, that an oath is justice; and that on that account, Jupiter is called Jupiter of Oaths (Ὅρκιος). Also, that virtue is harmony, and health, and universal good, and God; on which account everything owes its existence and consistency to harmony. Also, that friendship is a harmonious equality.</p>
				<p>Again, they teach that one ought not to pay equal honors to Gods and to heroes; but that one ought to honor the Gods at all times, extolling them with praises, clothed in white garments, and keeping one’s body chaste; but that one ought not to pay such honor to the heroes till after midday. Also, that a state of purity is brought about by purifications, and washings, and sprinklings, and by a man’s purifying himself from all funerals, or concubinage, or pollution of every kind, and by abstaining from all flesh that has either been killed or died of itself, and from mullets, and from melanuri, and from eggs, and from such animals as lay eggs, and from beans, and from other things which are prohibited by those who have the charge of the mysteries in the temples.</p>
				<p>And Aristotle says, in his treatise on Beans, that Pythagoras enjoined his disciples to abstain from beans, either because they resemble some part of the human body, or because they are like the gates of hell (for they are the only plants without parts); or because they dry up other plants, or because they are representatives of universal nature, or because they are used in elections in oligarchical governments. He also forbade his disciples to pick up what fell from the table, for the sake of accustoming them not to eat immoderately, or else because such things belong to the dead.</p>
				<p>But Aristophanes says that what falls belongs to the heroes; saying, in his Heroes:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Never taste the things which fall</span>
						<span>From the table on the floor.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>He also forbade his disciples to eat white poultry, because a cock of that colour was sacred to Month, and was also a suppliant. He was also accounted a good animal;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-114" id="noteref-114" epub:type="noteref">114</a> and he was sacred to the God Month, for he indicates the time.</p>
				<p>The Pythagoreans were also forbidden to eat of all fish that were sacred; on the ground that the same animals ought not to be served up before both Gods and men, just as the same things do not belong to freemen and to slaves. Now, white is an indication of a good nature, and black of a bad one. Another of the precepts of Pythagoras was, that men ought not to break bread; because in ancient times friends used to assemble around one loaf, as they even now do among the barbarians. Nor would he allow men to divide bread which unites them. Some think that he laid down this rule in reference to the judgment which takes place in hell; some because this practice engenders timidity in war. According to others, what is alluded to is the Union, which presides over the government of the universe.</p>
				<p>Another of his doctrines was, that of all solid figures the sphere was the most beautiful; and of all plane figures, the circle. That old age and all diminution were similar, and also increase and youth were identical. That health was the permanence of form, and disease the destruction of it. Of salt his opinion was, that it ought to be set before people as a reminder of justice; for salt preserves everything which it touches, and it is composed of the purest particles of water and sea.</p>
				<p>These are the doctrines which Alexander asserts that he discovered in the Pythagorean treatises; and Aristotle gives a similar account of them.</p>
				<p>Timon, in his Silli, has not left unnoticed the dignified appearance of Pythagoras, when he attacks him on other points. And his words are these:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Pythagoras, who often teaches</span>
						<span>Precepts of magic, and with speeches</span>
						<span>Of long high-sounding diction draws,</span>
						<span>From gaping crowds, a vain applause.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And respecting his having been different people at different times, Xenophanes adds his evidence in an elegiac poem which commences thus:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Now I will on another subject touch,</span>
						<span>And lead the way.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And the passage in which he mentions Pythagoras is as follows:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>They say that once, as passing by he saw</span>
						<span>A dog severely beaten, he did pity him,</span>
						<span>And spoke as follows to the man who beat him:⁠—</span>
						<span>“Stop now, and beat him not; since in his body,</span>
						<span>Abides the soul of a dear friend of mine,</span>
						<span>Whose voice I recognized as he was crying.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>These are the words of Xenophanes.</p>
				<p>Cratinus also ridiculed him in his Pythagorean Woman; but in his Tarentines, he speaks thus:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>They are accustomed, if by chance they see</span>
						<span>A private individual abroad,</span>
						<span>To try what powers of argument he has,</span>
						<span>How he can speak and reason: and they bother him</span>
						<span>With strange antithesis and forced conclusions,</span>
						<span>Errors, comparisons, and magnitudes,</span>
						<span>Till they have filled and quite perplex’d his mind.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And Mnesimachus says in his Alcmaeon:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>As we do sacrifice to the Phoebus whom</span>
						<span>Pythagoras worships, never eating aught</span>
						<span>Which has the breath of life.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Aristophon says in his Pythagorean:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span><i>A.</i> He said that when he did descend below</span>
						<span>Among the shades in Hell, he there beheld</span>
						<span>All men who e’er had died; and there he saw,</span>
						<span>That the Pythagoreans differ’d much</span>
						<span>From all the rest; for that with them alone</span>
						<span>Did Pluto deign to eat, much honoring</span>
						<span>Their pious habits.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>
							<i>B.</i>
							<span class="half-line">He’s a civil God,</span>
						</span>
						<span>If he likes eating with such dirty fellows.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And again, in the same play he says:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<div class="verse indent11">They eat</div>
						<span>Nothing but herbs and vegetables, and drink</span>
						<span>Pure water only. But their lice are such,</span>
						<span>Their cloaks so dirty, and their unwash’d scent</span>
						<span>So rank, that no one of our younger men</span>
						<span>Will for a moment bear them.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Pythagoras died in this manner. When he was sitting with some of his companions in Milo’s house, someone of those whom he did not think worthy of admission into it, was excited by envy to set fire to it. But some say that the people of Crotona themselves did this, being afraid lest he might aspire to the tyranny. And that Pythagoras was caught as he was trying to escape; and coming to a place full of beans, he stopped there, saying that it was better to be caught than to trample on the beans, and better to be slain than to speak; and so he was murdered by those who were pursuing him. And in this way, also, most of his companions were slain; being in number about forty; but that a very few did escape, among whom were Archippus, of Tarentum, and Lysis, whom I have mentioned before.</p>
				<p>But Dicaearchus relates that Pythagoras died afterwards, having escaped as far as the temple of the Muses, at Metapontum, and that he died there of starvation, having abstained from food for forty days. And Heraclides says, in his abridgment of the life of Satyrus, that after he had buried Pherecydes in Delos, he returned to Italy, and finding there a superb banquet prepared at the house of Milo, of Crotona, he left Crotona, and went to Metapontum, and there put an end to his life by starvation, not wishing to live any longer. But Hermippus says that when there was war between the people of Agrigentum and the Syracusans, Pythagoras went out with his usual companions, and took the part of the Agrigentines; and as they were put to flight, he ran all round a field of beans, instead of crossing it, and so was slain by the Syracusans; and that the rest, being about five-and-thirty in number, were burnt at Tarentum, when they were trying to excite a sedition in the state against the principal magistrates.</p>
				<p>Hermippus also relates another story about Pythagoras. For he says that when he was in Italy, he made a subterraneous apartment, and charged his mother to write an account of everything that took place, marking the time of each on a tablet, and then to send them down to him, until he came up again; and that his mother did so; and that Pythagoras came up again after a certain time, lean, and reduced to a skeleton; and that he came into the public assembly, and said that he had arrived from the shades below, and then he recited to them all that had happened during his absence. And they, being charmed by what he told them, wept and lamented, and believed that Pythagoras was a divine being; so that they even entrusted their wives to him, as likely to learn some good from him; and that they too were called Pythagoreans. And this is the story of Hermippus.</p>
				<p>And Pythagoras had a wife, whose name was Theano; the daughter of Brontinus, of Crotona. But some say that she was the wife of Brontinus, and only a pupil of Pythagoras. And he had a daughter named Damo, as Lysis mentions in his letter to Hipparchus; where he speaks thus of Pythagoras: “And many say that you philosophize in public, as Pythagoras also used to do; who, when he had entrusted his Commentaries to Damo, his daughter, charged her to divulge them to no person out of the house. And she, though she might have sold his discourses for much money, would not abandon them, for she thought poverty and obedience to her father’s injunctions more valuable than gold; and that too, though she was a woman.”</p>
				<p>He had also a son, named Telauges, who was the successor of his father in his school, and who, according to some authors, was the teacher of Empedocles. At least Hippobotus relates that Empedocles said:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>“Telauges, noble youth, whom in due time,</span>
						<span>Theano bore to wise Pythagoras.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>But there is no book extant, which is the work of Telauges, though there are some extant, which are attributed to his mother Theano. And they tell a story of her, that once, when she was asked how long a woman ought to be absent from her husband to be pure, she said, the moment she leaves her own husband, she is pure; but she is never pure at all, after she leaves anyone else. And she recommended a woman, who was going to her husband, to put off her modesty with her clothes, and when she left him, to resume it again with her clothes; and when she was asked, “What clothes?” she said, “Those which cause you to be called a woman.”</p>
				<p>Now Pythagoras, as Heraclides, the son of Sarapion, relates, died when he was eighty years of age; according to his own account of his age, but according to the common account, he was more than ninety. And we have written a sportive epigram on him, which is couched in the following terms:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>You’re not the only man who has abstained</span>
						<span>From living food, for so likewise have we;</span>
						<span>And who, I’d like to know did ever taste</span>
						<span>Food while alive, most sage Pythagoras?</span>
						<span>When meat is boil’d, or roasted well and salted,</span>
						<span>I don’t think it can well be called living.</span>
						<span>Which, therefore, without scruple then we eat it,</span>
						<span>And call it no more living flesh, but meat.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And another, which runs thus:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Pythagoras was so wise a man, that he</span>
						<span>Never eat meat himself, and called it sin.</span>
						<span>And yet he gave good joints of beef to others.</span>
						<span>So that I marvel at his principles;</span>
						<span>Who others wronged, by teaching them to do</span>
						<span>What he believed unholy for himself.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And another, as follows:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Should you Pythagoras’ doctrine wish to know,</span>
						<span>Look on the center of Euphorbus’ shield.</span>
						<span>For he asserts there lived a man of old,</span>
						<span>And when he had no longer an existence,</span>
						<span>He still could say that he had been alive,</span>
						<span>Or else he would not still be living now.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And this one too:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Alas! alas! why did Pythagoras hold</span>
						<span>Beans in such wondrous honor? Why, besides,</span>
						<span>Did he thus die among his choice companions?</span>
						<span>There was a field of beans; and so the sage,</span>
						<span>Died in the common road of Agrigentum,</span>
						<span>Rather than trample down his favorite beans.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And he flourished about the sixtieth olympiad; and his system lasted for nine or ten generations. And the last of the Pythagoreans, whom Aristoxenus knew, were Xenophilus, the Chalcidean, from Thrace; and Phanton, the Phliasian, and Echecrates, and Diodes, and Polymnestus, who were also Phliasians, and they were disciples of Philolaus and Eurytus, of Tarentum.</p>
				<p>And there were four men of the name of Pythagoras, about the same time, at no great distance from one another. One was a native of Crotona, a man who attained tyrannical power; the second was a Phliasian, a trainer of wrestlers, as some say; the third was a native of Zacynthus; the fourth was this our philosopher, to whom they say the mysteries of philosophy belong, in whose time that proverbial phrase, “Ipse dixit,” was introduced into ordinary life. Some also affirm, that there was another man of the name of Pythagoras, a statuary of Rhodes; who is believed to have been the first discoverer of rhythm and proportion; and another was a Samian statuary; and another an orator, of no reputation; and another was a physician, who wrote a treatise on Squills; and also some essays on Homer; and another was a man, who wrote a history of the affairs of the Dorians, as we are told by Dionysius.</p>
				<p>But Eratosthenes says, as Phavorinus quotes him, in the eighth book of his Universal History, that this philosopher, of whom we are speaking, was the first man who ever practised boxing in a scientific manner, in the forty-eighth olympiad, having his hair long, and being clothed in a purple robe; and that he was rejected from the competition among boys, and being ridiculed for his application, he immediately entered among the men, and came off victorious. And this statement is confirmed among other things, by the epigram which Theaetetus composed:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Stranger, if e’er you knew Pythagoras,</span>
						<span>Pythagoras, the man with flowing hair,</span>
						<span>The celebrated boxer, erst of Samos;</span>
						<span>I am Pythagoras. And if you ask</span>
						<span>A citizen of Elis of my deeds,</span>
						<span>You’ll surely think he is relating fables.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Phavorinus says that he employed definitions, on account of the mathematical subjects to which he applied himself. And that Socrates and those who were his pupils, did so still more; and that they were subsequently followed in this by Aristotle and the Stoics.</p>
				<p>He too, was the first person, who ever gave the name of κόσμος to the universe, and the first who called the earth round; though Theophrastus attributes this to Parmenides, and Zeno to Hesiod. They say too, that Cylon used to be a constant adversary of his, as Antidicus was of Socrates. And this epigram also used to be repeated, concerning Pythagoras the athlete:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Pythagoras of Samos, son of Crates,</span>
						<span>Came while a child to the Olympic games,</span>
						<span>Eager to battle for the prize in boxing.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>There is a letter of this philosopher extant, which is couched in the following terms:⁠—</p>
				<h4>Pythagoras to Anaximenes</h4>
				<p>“You too, my most excellent friend, if you were not superior to Pythagoras, in birth and reputation, would have migrated from Miletus and gone elsewhere. But now the reputation of your father keeps you back, which perhaps would have restrained me too, if I had been like Anaximenes. But if you, who are the most eminent man, abandon the cities, all their ornaments will be taken from them, and the Median power will be more dangerous to them. Nor is it always seasonable to be studying astronomy, but it is more honorable to exhibit a regard for one’s country. And I myself am not always occupied about speculations of my own fancy, but I am busied also with the wars which the Italians are waging against one another.”</p>
				<p>But since we have now finished our account of Pythagoras, we must also speak of the most eminent of the Pythagoreans. After whom, we must mention those who are spoken of more promiscuously in connection with no particular school; and then we will connect the whole series of philosophers worth speaking of, till we arrive at Epicurus, as we have already promised.</p>
				<p>Now Telauges and Theano we have mentioned; and we must now speak of Empedocles, in the first place, for, according to some accounts, he was a pupil of Pythagoras.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-8-2">
				<h3>Life of Empedocles</h3>
				<p>Empedocles, as Hippobotus relates, was the son of Meton, the son of Empedocles, and a citizen of Agrigentum. And Timaeus, in the fifteenth book of his Histories, gives the same account, adding that Empedocles, the grandfather of the poet, was also a most eminent man. And Hermippus tells the same story as Timaeus; and in the same spirit Heraclides, in his treatise on Diseases, relates that he was of an illustrious family, since his father bred a fine stud of horses. Erastothenes, in his List of the Conquerors at the Olympic Games, says that the father of Meton gained the victory in the seventy-first olympiad, quoting Aristotle as his authority for the assertion.</p>
				<p>But Apollodorus, the grammarian, in his Chronicles, says that he was the son of Meton; and Glaucus says that he came to Thurii when the city was only just completed. And then proceeding a little further, he adds:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>And some relate that he did flee from thence,</span>
						<span>And came to Syracuse, and on their side</span>
						<span>Did fight in horrid war against th’ Athenians;</span>
						<span>But those men seem to me completely wrong⁠—</span>
						<span>For by this time he must have been deceased,</span>
						<span>Or very old, which is not much believed;</span>
						<span>For Aristotle, and Heraclides too,</span>
						<span>Say that he died at sixty years of age.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>But certainly the person who got the victory with a single horse in the seventy-first olympiad was a namesake of this man, and that it is which deceived Apollodorus as to the age of this philosopher.</p>
				<p>But Satyrus, in his Lives, asserts, that Empedocles was the son of Exaenetus, and that he also left a son who was named Exaenetus. And that in the same Olympiad, he himself gained the victory with the single horse; and his son, in wrestling, or, as Heraclides says in his Abridgment, in running. But I have found in the Commentaries of Phavorinus, that Empedocles sacrificed, and gave as a feast to the spectators of the games, an ox made of honey and flour, and that he had a brother named Callicratidas.</p>
				<p>But Telauges, the son of Pythagoras, in his letters to Philolaus, says that Empedocles was the son of Archinomus; and that he was a citizen of Agrigentum, he himself asserts at the beginning of his Purifications.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Friends, who the mighty citadel inhabit,</span>
						<span>Which crowns the golden waves of Acragas.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And this is enough to say about his family.</p>
				<p>Timaeus, in his ninth book, relates that he was a pupil of Pythagoras, saying that he was afterwards convicted of having divulged his doctrines, in the same way as Plato was, and therefore that he was forbidden from thenceforth to attend his school. And they say that Pythagoras himself mentions him when he says:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>And in that band there was a learned man</span>
						<span>Of wondrous wisdom; one, who of all men</span>
						<span>Had the profoundest wealth of intellect.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>But some say that when the philosopher says this, he is referring to Parmenides.</p>
				<p>Neanthes relates, that till the time of Philolaus and Empedocles, the Pythagoreans used to admit all persons indiscriminately into their school; but when Empedocles made their doctrines public by means of his poems, then they made a law to admit no Epic poet. And they say that the same thing happened to Plato; for that he too was excluded from the school. But who was the teacher of the Pythagorean school that Empedocles was a pupil of, they do not say; for, as for the letter of Telauges, in which he is stated to have been a pupil of Hippasus and Brontinus, that is not worthy of belief. But Theophrastus says that he was an imitator and a rival of Parmenides, in his poems, for that he too had delivered his opinions on natural philosophy in epic verse.</p>
				<p>Hermippus, however, says that he was an imitator, not of Parmenides, but of Xenophanes with whom he lived; and that he imitated his epic style, and that it was at a later period that he fell in with the Pythagoreans. But Alcidamas, in his Natural Philosophy, says that Zeno and Empedocles were pupils of Parmenides, about the same time; and that they subsequently seceded from him; and that Zeno adopted a philosophical system peculiar to himself; but that Empedocles became a pupil of Anaxagoras and Pythagoras, and that he imitated the pompous demeanour, and way of life, and gestures of the one, and the system of Natural Philosophy of the other.</p>
				<p>And Aristotle, in his Sophist, says that Empedocles was the first person who invented rhetoric, and Zeno the first person who invented dialectics. And in his book on Poetry, he says that Empedocles was a man of Homeric genius, and endowed with great power of language, and a great master of metaphor, and a man who employed all the successful artifices of poetry, and also that when he had written several poems, and among them one on the passage of the Hellespont, by Xerxes, and also the prooemium of a hymn to Apollo, his daughter subsequently burnt them, or, as Hieronymus says, his sister, burning the prooemium unintentionally, but the Persian poem on purpose, because it was incomplete. And speaking generally, he says that he wrote tragedies and political treatises.</p>
				<p>But Heraclides, the son of Sarapion, says that the tragedies were the work of some other Empedocles; and Hieronymus says that he had met with forty-three. Neanthes, too, affirms that when he was a young man, he wrote tragedies, and that he himself had subsequently met with them; and Satyrus, in his Lives, states that he was a physician, and also a most excellent orator. And accordingly, that Gorgias, of Leontini, was his pupil, a man of the greatest eminence as a rhetorician, and one who left behind him a treatise containing a complete system of the art; and who, as we are told by Apollodorus, in his Chronicles, lived to the age of a hundred and nine years.</p>
				<p>Satyrus tells us that he used to say that he had been present when Empedocles was practising magic; and that he professes this science, and many others too in his poems when he says:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>And all the drugs which can relieve disease,</span>
						<span>Or soften the approach of age, shall be</span>
						<span>Revealed to your inquiries; I do know them,</span>
						<span>And I to you alone will them disclose.</span>
						<span>You shall restrain the fierce unbridled winds,</span>
						<span>Which, rushing o’er the earth, bow down the corn,</span>
						<span>And crush the farmer’s hopes. And when you will,</span>
						<span>You shall recall them back to sweep the land:</span>
						<span>Then you shall learn to dry the rainy clouds,</span>
						<span>And bid warm summer cheer the heart of men.</span>
						<span>Again, at your behest, the drought shall yield</span>
						<span>To wholesome show’rs: when you give the word</span>
						<span>Hell shall restore its dead.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And Timaeus, in his eighteenth book, says that this man was held in great esteem on many accounts; for that once, when the etesian gales were blowing violently, so as to injure the crops, he ordered some asses to be flayed, and some bladders to be made of their hides, and these he placed on the hills and high places to catch the wind. And so, when the wind ceased, he was called wind-forbidder (κωλυσανέμας). And Heraclides, in his treatise on Diseases, says that he dictated to Pausanias the statement which he made about the dead woman. Now Pausanias, as both Aristippus and Satyrus agree, was much attached to him; and he dedicated to him the works which he wrote on Natural Philosophy, in the following terms:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Hear, O Pausanias, son of wise Anchites.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>He also wrote an epigram upon him:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Gela, his native land, does boast the birth</span>
						<span>Of wise Anchites’ son, that great physician,</span>
						<span>So fitly named Pausanias,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-115" id="noteref-115" epub:type="noteref">115</a> from his skill;</span>
						<span>A genuine son of Aesculapius,</span>
						<span>Who has stopped many men whom fell disease</span>
						<span>Marked for its own, from treading those dark paths</span>
						<span>Which lead to Proserpine’s infernal realms.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The case of the dead woman above mentioned, Heraclides says, was something of this sort; that he kept her corpse for thirty days dead, and yet free from corruption; on which account he has called himself a physician and a prophet, taking it also from these verses:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Friends who the mighty citadel inhabit,</span>
						<span>Which crowns the golden waves of Acragas</span>
						<span>Votaries of noble actions, Hail to ye;</span>
						<span>I, an immortal God, no longer mortal,</span>
						<span>Now live among you well revered by all,</span>
						<span>As is my due, crowned with holy fillets</span>
						<span>And rosy garlands. And whene’er I come</span>
						<span>To wealthy cities, then from men and women</span>
						<span>Due honors meets me; and crowds follow me,</span>
						<span>Seeking the way which leads to gainful glory.</span>
						<span>Some ask for oracles, and some entreat,</span>
						<span>For remedies against all kinds of sickness.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And he says that Agrigentum was a very large city, since it had eight hundred thousand inhabitants; on which account Empedocles, seeing the people immersed in luxury, said, “The men of Agrigentum devote themselves wholly to luxury as if they were to die tomorrow, but they furnish their houses as if they were to live forever.”</p>
				<p>It is said that Cleomenes, the rhapsodist, sung this very poem, called the Purifications, at Olympia; at least this is the account given by Phavorinus, in his Commentaries.</p>
				<p>And Aristotle says that he was a most liberal man, and far removed from anything like a domineering spirit; since he constantly refused the sovereign power when it was offered to him, as Xanthus assures us in his account of him, showing plainly that he preferred a simple style of living. And Timaeus tells the same story, giving at the same time the reason why he was so very popular. For he says that when on one occasion, he was invited to a banquet by one of the magistrates, the wine was carried about, but the supper was not served up. And as everyone else kept silence, he, disapproving of what he saw, bade the servants bring in the supper; but the person who had invited him said that he was waiting for the secretary of the council. And when he came he was appointed master of the feast, at the instigation of the giver of it, and then he gave a plain intimation of his tyrannical inclinations, for he ordered all the guests to drink, and those who did not drink were to have the wine poured over their heads. Empedocles said nothing at the moment, but the next day he summoned them before the court, and procured the execution of both the entertainer and the master of the feast.</p>
				<p>And this was the beginning of his political career. And at another time, when Acron, the physician, asked of the council a place where he might erect a monument to his father, on account of his eminence as a physician, Empedocles came forward and opposed any such grant, adducing many arguments on the ground of equality, and also putting the following question:⁠—“And what elegy shall we inscribe upon it? Shall we say:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>“Ἄκρον ἰητρὸν Ἄκρων’ Ἀκραγαντῖνον πατρὸς ἄκρου</span>
						<span>κρύπτει κρημνὸς ἄκρος πατρίδος ἀκροτάτης.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-116" id="noteref-116" epub:type="noteref">116</a></span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>But some give the second line thus:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Ἀκροτάτης κορυφῆς τύμβος ἄκρος κατέχει.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And others assert that it is the composition of Simonides.</p>
				<p>But afterwards Empedocles abolished the assembly of a thousand, and established a council in which the magistrates were to hold office for three years, on such a footing that it should consist not only of rich men, but of those who were favorers of the interests of the people. Timaeus, however, in his first and second book (for he often mentions him), says that he appeared to entertain opinions adverse to a republic. And, as far as his poetry goes, anyone may see that he was arrogant and self-satisfied. Accordingly, he says:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<div class="verse indent9">Hail to ye,</div>
						<span>I, an immortal God, no longer mortal,</span>
						<span>Now live among you:</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And so on.</p>
				<p>But when he went to the olympic games he was considered a worthy object of general attention; so that there was no mention made of anyone else in comparison of Empedocles.</p>
				<p>Afterwards, indeed, when Agrigentum was settled, the descendants of his enemies opposed his return; on which account he retired to Peloponnesus, where he died. And Timon has not let even Empedocles escape, but satirises him in this style, saying:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>And then Empedocles, the honeyed speaker</span>
						<span>Of soft forensic speeches; he did take</span>
						<span>As many offices as he was able,</span>
						<span>Creating magistrates who wanted helpers.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>But there are two accounts of the manner of his death.</p>
				<p>For Heraclides, relating the story about the dead woman, how Empedocles got great glory from sending away a dead woman restored to life, says that he celebrated a sacrifice in the field of Pisianax, and that some of his friends were invited, among whom was Pausanias. And then, after the banquet, they lay down, some going a little way off, and some lying under the trees close by in the field, and some wherever they happened to choose. But Empedocles himself remained in the place where he had been sitting. But when day broke, and they arose, he alone was not found. And when he was sought for, and the servants were examined and said that they did not know, one of them said, that at midnight he had heard a loud voice calling Empedocles; and that then he himself rose up and saw a great light from heaven, but nothing else. And as they were all amazed at what had taken place, Pausanias descended and sent some people to look for him; but afterwards he was commanded not to busy himself about the matter, as he was informed that what had happened was deserving of thankfulness, and that they behoved to sacrifice to Empedocles as to one who had become a God.</p>
				<p>Hermippus says also, that a woman of the name of Panthea, a native of Agrigentum, who had been given over by the physicians, was cured by him, and that it was on this account that he celebrated a sacrifice; and that the guests invited were about eighty in number. But Hippobotus says that he rose up and went away as if he were going to mount Etna; and that when he arrived at the crater of fire he leaped in, and disappeared, wishing to establish a belief that he had become a God. But afterwards the truth was detected by one of his slippers having been dropped. For he used to wear slippers with brazen soles. Pausanias, however, contradicts this statement.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-117" id="noteref-117" epub:type="noteref">117</a></p>
				<p>But Diodorus, of Ephesus, writing about Anaximander, says that Empedocles imitated him; indulging in a tragic sort of pride, and wearing magnificent apparel. And when a pestilence attacked the people of Selinus, by reason of the bad smells arising from the adjacent river, so that the men died and the women bore dead children, Empedocles contrived a plan, and brought into the same channel two other rivers at his own expense; and so, by mixing their waters with that of the other river, he sweetened the stream. And as the pestilence was removed in this way, when the people of Selinus were on one occasion holding a festival on the bank of the river, Empedocles appeared among them; and they rising up, offered him adoration, and prayed to him as to a God. And he, wishing to confirm this idea which they had adopted of him, leaped into the fire.</p>
				<p>But Timaeus contradicts all these stories; saying expressly, that he departed into Peloponnesus, and never returned at all, on which account the manner of his death is uncertain. And he especially denies the tale of Heraclides in his fourth book; for he says that Pisianax was a Syracusan, and had no field in the district of Agrigentum; but that Pausanias erected a monument in honor of his friend, since such a report had got about concerning him; and, as he was a rich man, made it a statue and little chapel, as one might erect to a God. “How then,” adds Timaeus, “could he have leaped into a crater, of which, though they were in the neighbourhood, he had never made any mention? He died then in Peloponnesus; and there is nothing extraordinary in there being no tomb of his to be seen; for there are many other men who have no tomb visible.” These are the words of Timaeus; and he adds further, “But Heraclides is altogether a man fond of strange stories, and one who would assert that a man had fallen from the moon.”</p>
				<p>Hippobotus says that there was a clothed statue of Empedocles which lay formerly in Agrigentum, but which was afterwards placed in front of the Senate House of the Romans divested of its clothing, as the Romans had carried it off and erected it there. And there are traces of some inscriptions or reliefs still discernible on it.</p>
				<p>Neanthes of Cyzicus, who also wrote about the Pythagoreans, says that when Meton was dead, the seeds of tyrannical power began to appear; and that then Empedocles persuaded the Agrigentines to desist from their factious disputes, and to establish political equality. And besides, as there were many of the female citizens destitute of dowry, he portioned them out of his own private fortune. And relying on these actions of his, he assumed a purple robe and wore a golden circlet on his hand, as Phavorinus relates in the first book of his Commentaries. He also wore slippers with brazen soles, and a Delphian garland. His hair was let grow very long, and he had boys to follow him; and he himself always preserved a solemn countenance, and a uniformly grave deportment. And he marched about in such style, that he seemed to all the citizens, who met him and who admired his deportment, to exhibit a sort of likeness to kingly power. And afterwards, it happened that as on the occasion of some festival he was going in a chariot to Messene, he was upset and broke his thigh; and he was taken ill in consequence, and so died, at the age of seventy-seven. And his tomb is in Megara.</p>
				<p>But as to his age, Aristotle differs from this account of Neanthes; for he asserts that he died at sixty years of age; others again say that he was a hundred and nine when he died. He flourished about the eighty-fourth olympiad. Demetrius, of Troezen, in his book against the Sophists, reports that, as the lines of Homer say:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>He now, self-murdered, from a beam depends,</span>
						<span>And his mad soul to blackest hell descends.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-118" id="noteref-118" epub:type="noteref">118</a></span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>But in the letter of Telauges, which has been mentioned before, it is said that he slipped down through old age, and fell into the sea, and so died.</p>
				<p>And this is enough to say about his death.</p>
				<p>There is also a jesting epigram of ours upon him, in our collection of Poems in all Metres, which runs thus:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>You too, Empedocles, essayed to purge</span>
						<span>Your body in the rapid flames, and drank</span>
						<span>The liquid fire from the restless crater;</span>
						<span>I say not that you threw yourself at once</span>
						<span>Into the stream of Etna’s fiery flood.</span>
						<span>But seeking to conceal yourself you fell,</span>
						<span>And so you met with unintended death.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And another:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>’Tis said the wise Empedocles did fall</span>
						<span>Out of his chariot, and so broke his thigh:</span>
						<span>But if he leapt into the flames of Etna,</span>
						<span>How could his tomb be shown in Megara?</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The following were some of his doctrines. He used to assert that there were four elements, fire, water, earth, and air. And that that is friendship by which they are united, and discord by which they are separated. And he speaks thus on this subject:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Bright Jove, life-giving Juno, Pluto dark,</span>
						<span>And Nestis, who fills mortal eyes with tears.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Meaning by Jove fire, by Juno the earth, by Pluto the air, and by Nestis water. And these things, says he, never cease alternating with one another; inasmuch as this arrangement is perpetual. Accordingly, he says subsequently:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Sometimes in friendship bound they coalesce,</span>
						<span>Sometimes they’re parted by fell discord’s hate.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And he asserts that the sun is a vast assemblage of fire, and that it is larger than the moon. And the moon is disk-shaped; and that the heaven itself is like crystal; and that the soul inhabits every kind of form of animals and plants. Accordingly, he thus expresses himself.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>For once I was a boy, and once a girl.</span>
						<span>A bush, a bird, a fish who swims the sea,</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>His writings on Natural Philosophy and his Purifications extend to five thousand verses; and his Medical Poem to six hundred; and his Tragedies we have spoken of previously.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-8-3">
				<h3>Life of Epicharmus</h3>
				<p>Epicharmus was a native of Cos, the son of Helothales; he also was a pupil of Pythagoras. When he was three months old he was brought to Megara, in Sicily, and from thence he came to Syracuse, as he himself tells us in his writings. And on his statue there is the following inscription.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>As the bright sun excels the other stars,</span>
						<span>As the sea far exceeds the river streams:</span>
						<span>So does sage Epicharmus men surpass,</span>
						<span>Whom hospitable Syracuse has crowned.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>He has left behind him Commentaries in which he treats of natural philosophy, and delivers apothegms, and discusses medicine. He has also added brief notes to many of his commentaries, in which he declares plainly that he is the author of the works.</p>
				<p>He died at the age of ninety years.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-8-4">
				<h3>Life of Archytas</h3>
				<p>Archytas was a native of Tarentum, and the son of Mnesagoras; or, as Aristoxenus relates, of Histiaeus.</p>
				<p>He also was a Pythagorean; and he it was who saved Plato’s life by means of a letter, when he was in danger of being put to death by Dionysius.</p>
				<p>He was a man held in very general esteem on account of his universal virtue; and he was seven times appointed general of his countrymen, when no one else had ever held the office for more than one year, as the law forbade it to be held for a longer period.</p>
				<p>Plato wrote his letters to him; as he had begun the correspondence by writing himself to Plato, which he did in the following manner:⁠—</p>
				<h4>Archytas to Plato, Greeting</h4>
				<p>“I am very glad that you have recovered from your delicate state of health; for you yourself have sent me word of your recovery, and Lamiscus gives the same account. I have been much occupied with some commentaries, and have been among the Lucanians, and have met with the descendants of Ocellus. I have now in my possession, and I send to you the treatises on Law, and Kingly Power, and Piety, and the Creation of the Universe. As for the rest, I have not been able to find them, but whenever I do find any, I will send them to you.”</p>
				<p>Thus wrote Archytas. And Plato sent him an answer in the following terms:⁠—</p>
				<h4>Plato to Archytas, Greeting</h4>
				<p>“I was exceedingly glad to receive the Commentaries which came from you, and I have admired their author in the greatest possible degree; and he seems to us to be a man worthy of his ancient ancestors. For they are said to have been originally natives of Myra; and to have been among the Trojans, whom Laomedon took with him, gallant men, as the story handed down by tradition attests. As for my Commentaries which you ask me for, they are not yet completed, but such as they are I send them to you. And on the propriety of taking care of such things we are both agreed, so that I have no need to impress anything on you on that head. Farewell.”</p>
				<p>These then are the letters which these philosophers wrote to one another.</p>
				<p>There were four people of the name of Archytas. The first, this man of whom we are speaking. The second was a Mytilenean, a musician. The third wrote a treatise on Agriculture. The fourth was an epigrammatic poet. Some writers also make mention of a fifth, who was an architect; and there is a book on mechanics extant which is attributed to him; which begins in this way:⁠—</p>
				<p>“This is what I heard from Teucer, the Carthaginian.”</p>
				<p>And concerning the musician, the following story is told: That once he was reproached for not making himself heard, and he replied, “My organ contends on my behalf, and speaks.”</p>
				<p>Aristoxenus says that this Pythagorean was never once defeated while acting as general. But that as he was attacked by envy, he once gave up his command, and his army was immediately taken prisoner.</p>
				<p>He was the first person who applied mathematical principles to mechanics, and reduced them to a system; and the first also who gave a methodical impulse to descriptive geometry in seeking, in the sections of a demicylinder for a proportional mean, which should enable him to find the double of a given cube. He was also the first person who ever gave the geometrical measure of a cube, as Plato mentions in his Republic.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-8-5">
				<h3>Life of Alcmaeon</h3>
				<p>Alcmaeon was a citizen of Crotona; he also was a pupil of Pythagoras. And the chief part of his writings are on medical subjects; but he also at times discusses points of natural philosophy, and asserts that the greater part of human affairs have two sides. He appears to have been the first person who wrote a treatise on Natural Philosophy, as Phavorinus affirms, in his Universal History; and he used to argue that the moon had the same nature forever which she had at that moment.</p>
				<p>He was the son of Pirithus, as he himself states at the beginning of his treatise, where he says, “Alcmaeon, of Crotona, the son of Pirithus, says this to Brontinus, and Leon, and Bathyllus. About things invisible, and things mortal, the Gods alone have a certain knowledge; but men may form conjectures. …” And so on.</p>
				<p>He used also to say that the soul was immortal, and that it was in a state of perpetual motion in the same way as the sun.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-8-6">
				<h3>Life of Hippasus</h3>
				<p>Hippasus was a citizen of Metapontum, and a pupil of Pythagoras.</p>
				<p>He used to say that the time of the changes of the world was definite, and that the universe also was finite, and in a state of perpetual motion.</p>
				<p>Demetrius, in his treatise on People of the same Name, says that he left no writings behind him.</p>
				<p>There were two people of the name of Hippasus; this man, and another who wrote an account of the Constitution of the Lacedaemonians, in five books. And he was himself a Lacedaemonian.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-8-7">
				<h3>Life of Philolaus</h3>
				<p>Philolaus was a native of Crotona, and a pupil of Pythagoras, it was from him that Plato wrote to Dion to take care and purchase the books of Pythagoras.</p>
				<p>And he died under suspicion of having designed to seize on the tyranny; and we have written an epigram on him:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>I say that all men ought above all things</span>
						<span>To guard against suspicion. For, though innocent,</span>
						<span>Still if you are suspected, you’re unfortunate.</span>
						<span>And thus his native city of Crotona</span>
						<span>Slew Philolaus; for the jealous citizens</span>
						<span>Thought that his house betrayed a tyrant’s purpose.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>His theory was, that everything was produced by harmony and necessity. And he was the first person who affirmed that the earth moved in a circle; though some attribute the assertion of this principle to Icetas of Syracuse.</p>
				<p>He wrote one book, which Hermippus reports, on the authority of some unknown writer, that Plato the philosopher purchased when he was in Sicily (having come thither to the court of Dionysius), of the relations of Philolaus, for forty Alexandrian minae of silver; and that from this book he copied his Timaeus. But others say that Plato received it as a present, after having obtained his liberty for a young man, one of the disciples of Philolaus, who had been arrested by Dionysius. Demetrius, in his treatise on people of the same name, says that he was the first of the Pythagoreans who wrote a treatise on Natural Philosophy; and it begins thus:⁠—</p>
				<p>“But nature in the world has been composed of bodies infinite and finite, and so is the whole world and all that is in it.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-8-8">
				<h3>Life of Eudoxus</h3>
				<p>Eudoxus was the son of Aeschines, and a native of Cnidus. He was an astronomer, a geometrician, a physician, and a lawgiver. In geometry he was a pupil of Archytas, and in medicine of Philistion, the Sicilian, as Callimachus relates in his Tablets; and Sotion, in his Successions, asserts that he was likewise a pupil of Plato; for that, when he was twenty-three years of age, and in very narrow circumstances, he came to Athens with Theomedon the physician, by whom he was chiefly supported, being attracted by the reputation of the Socratic school. Some say that his attachment to Theomedon was cemented by nearer ties. And when he had arrived at Piraeus, he went up to the city every day, and when he had heard the Sophists lecture he returned. And having spent two months there, he returned home again; and being again aided by the contributions of his friends, he set sail for Egypt, with Chrysippus the physician, bearing letters of introduction from Agesilaus to Nectanabis, and that he recommended him to the priests.</p>
				<p>And having remained there a year and four months, he shaved his eyebrows after the manner of the Egyptian priests, and composed, as it is said, the treatise called the Octaeteris. From thence he went to Cyzicus, and to the Propontis, in both of which places he lived as a Sophist; he also went to the court of Mausolus. And then, in this manner, he returned again to Athens, having a great many disciples with him, for the sake, as some say, of annoying Plato, because he had originally discarded him from his school. Some say that when Plato gave an entertainment on one occasion, Eudoxus, as the guests were very numerous, introduced the fashion of sitting in a semicircle.</p>
				<p>Nicomachus, the son of Aristotle, affirms that he used to say that pleasure was the good.</p>
				<p>He was received in his own country with great honors, as the decree that was passed respecting him shows. He was also accounted very illustrious among the Greeks, having given laws to his own fellow citizens, as Hermippus tells us in the fourth book of his account of the Seven Wise Men; and having also written treatises on Astronomy and Geometry, and several other considerable works.</p>
				<p>He had three daughters, Actis, Philtis, and Delphis. And Eratosthenes asserts, in his books addressed to Baton, that he also composed dialogues entitled Dialogues of Dogs; others say that these were written by some Egyptians, in their own language, and that Eudoxus translated them, and published them in Greece. One of his pupils was Chrysippus, of Cnidos, son of Erineus, who learnt of him all that he knew about the Gods, and the world, and the heavenly bodies; and who learnt medicine from Philistion the Sicilian. He also left some very admirable Reminiscences.</p>
				<p>He had a son of the name of Aristagoras, who was the teacher of Chrysippus, the son of Aëthlius; he was the author of a work on Remedies for the Eyes, as speculations on natural philosophy had come very much under his notice.</p>
				<p>There were three people of the name of Eudoxus. The first, this man of whom we are speaking; the second, a Rhodian, who wrote histories; the third, a Siciliot, a son of Agathocles, a comic poet, who gained three victories at the Dionysia in the city, and five at the Lenaea,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-119" id="noteref-119" epub:type="noteref">119</a> as Apollodorus tells us in his Chronicles. We also find another, who was a physician of Cnidos, who is mentioned by this Eudoxus, in his Circuit of the World, where he says that he used to warn people to keep constantly exercising their limbs in every kind of exercise, and their senses too.</p>
				<p>The same author says that the Cnidean Eudoxus flourished about the hundred and third olympiad; and that he was the inventor of the theory of crooked lines. And he died in his fifty-third year. But when he was in Egypt with Conuphis, of Heliopolis, Apis licked his garment; and so the priests said that he would be short-lived, but very illustrious, as it is reported by Phavorinus in his Commentaries. And we have written an epigram on him, that runs thus:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>’Tis said, that while at Memphis wise Eudoxus</span>
						<span>Learnt his own fate from th’ holy fair-horned bull;</span>
						<span>He said indeed no word, bulls do not speak</span>
						<span>Nor had kind nature e’er calf Apis gifted</span>
						<span>With an articulately speaking mouth.</span>
						<span>But standing on one side he lick’d his cloak,</span>
						<span>Showing by this most plainly⁠—in brief time</span>
						<span>You shall put off your life. So death came soon,</span>
						<span>When he had just seen three and fifty times</span>
						<span>The Pleiads rise to warn the mariners.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And instead of Eudoxus, they used to call him Endoxus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-120" id="noteref-120" epub:type="noteref">120</a> on account of the brilliancy of his reputation. And since we have gone through the illustrious Pythagoreans, we must now speak of the Promiscuous philosophers, as they call them. And we will first of all speak of Heraclitus.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
